To Sir with Love

Asha and I were shopping on MG Road when we saw an old man walking slowly towards us. He might have been around sixty, with silver-grey hair and a few wrinkles on his face, but he still looked fit. He looked at Asha and smiled. She did not show any sign of recognition. The man stood in front of us for a second and then walked away.
After he left, I asked her, ‘Asha, don’t you think that man knows you? He smiled at you. Do you remember him?’
‘Of course I know him. He was my maths teacher in school. He taught us very badly and ruined my interest in maths. He was a terror, unapproachable and stern. He hardly taught us.’ There was anger and frustration in Asha’s voice. She might have exaggerated.
It is true that school teachers, more than college teachers, build your fundamentals. It is easy to teach at graduate and postgraduate levels, but difficult to do so at the school level. Teachers—good ones at least—must have an enormous amount of love for their students. Knowledge is not the only criterion to judge a teacher.
I thought of my own maths teacher. I wondered how I would have reacted had he met me on the road. What would he have done and how would he have greeted me? He probably would have said, ‘Why are you wasting your time on MG Road? Go back to office or work at home. Don’t teach without preparation.’
Without a second thought, I would have said, ‘Yes sir.’ Then, hesitantly, I would have asked, ‘Where are you staying? Can I come and see you some time later?’
 
He would have patted me on my shoulder with the same affection and concern that he showed me as a student and both of us would have laughed.
My teacher, Raghavendra Varnekar, was an extraordinary man in every sense of the word. He was from my home town, Hubli. He lived a very humble life and did not receive any recognition or awards. He excelled in his profession even though he was not a graduate. He taught mathematics so well that we never felt it was a difficult subject.
He would refer to mathematics as the ‘queen of science’. ‘Let us go and meet the queen,’ he would say as he led us into the wonderland of mathematics. There were numerous riders in geometry, hundreds of problems in algebra. He would teach them enthusiastically and say, ‘I am here for students who believe they are not good in maths. Good and bad are concepts of the mind. If you are hard- working and honestly want to understand the subject, then you can have an audience with the queen.’ He attracted students to his class the way a snake charmer attracts snakes with his music.
In his last days, he was unwell and I went to meet him with a small gift. In spite of his financial difficulties, he did not accept it. He told me, ‘The duty of a teacher is to make a student confident to face life. Life poses unknown examinations. The greatest joy to a teacher is to produce students better than him. I have done my duty very well. My students are so famous today that it gives me great joy and pride to be recognized as their teacher.’
I was surprised to hear this simple philosophy, which is very difficult to practise. Had he been in a bigger city and working in a bigger school, he would have made money by taking tuitions or by starting a school himself. He did not do that. He believed in his principle and his life was an example of it. He reminds me of a burning candle—giving light to everybody while burning itself out.
Today, when I stand on a dais and speak confidently or face any kind of difficulty in life, I think of my teacher. He taught me this lesson, which no amount of money can buy, no difficulties can dilute and no university can grant.
 
